Overview:
1 Modeling languages are used to specify, visualize, construct, and document systems.
2 UML has become the standard method for modeling software systems.
3 UML has a strict terminology for just about every aspect of modeling. This is necessary to reduce
  ambiguity and confusion as much as possible.
  However, in everyday use some terms are used interchangeably with others that have completely different
  meanings in UML. A classic example of this is operation and method.
4 Static modeling captures the physical structur of a piece of software

Chapter 1 Fundamentals of UML
1 For a developer: Class diagram --> Sequence diagram
2 For a process person: Activity diagram
3 UML basics
  3.1 First and formost, it is important to understand that UML is a language, this means it has both
    syntax and semantics.
  3.2 UML is applied where:
    >> Designing software
    >> Communicating software or business processes
    >> Capturing details about a system for requirements or analysis
    >> Documenting an existing system, process, or organization
  3.3 The basic building block of UML is a diagram.
  3.4 It is important to realize the UML is NOT a software process. It is meant to be used within a
    software process and has facets clearly intended to be part of an iterative development.
  3.5 Business process modeling:
    >> To capture behavior and process flow:
      a) Activity diagrams
      b) Statecharts
  3.6 It is important to realize that while the specification is the definitive source of the formal
    definition of UML, it is by no means the be-all and end-all of UML. UML is designed to be extended
    and interpreted depending on the domain, user, and specific application.
  3.7 However, you must be carefull when using nonstandard notation representation when collaborating
    with other users.
  3.8 Users new to UML can fall into the trap of trying to model everything about their system within
    a single diagram and end up missing critical information; or they may try to incorporate every
    possible UML diagram into their model, thereby overcomplicating things and creating a maintenance
    nightmare.
  3.9 Becoming proficient with UML means understanding what each diagram has to offer and knowing when
    to apply it. There will be many times when a concept could be expressed using any number of diagrams;
    pick the one(s) that will mean the most to your users.
  3.10 UML profiles: in addition to a variety of diagram types, UML is designed to be extended, you can
    informally extend UML by adding constraints, stereotypes, tagged values, and notes to your models,
    or you can use the formal UML extension and define a full UML profile.
  3.11 Modeling, is a means to capture ideas, relationships, decisions, and requirements in a well-defi-
    ned notation that can be applied to many different domains. Modeling not only means different things
    to different people, but also it can use different pieces of UML depending on what you are trying
    to convey.
  3.12 UML 2.0 divides diagrams into two categories: structural diagrams and behavioral diagrams:
    >> Structural diagrams are used to capture the physical organization of the things in your systems.
      > Class diagrams: classes and interfaces and the static relationships between them
      > Component diagrams: show the organization and dependencies involved in the implementation of a 
        system. They can group smaller elements, such as classes, into larger, deployable pieces.
      > Composite structure diagrams: as system become more complex, the relationships between elements
        grow in complexity, composite structure diagrams link class diagrams and component diagrams;
        Composite structure diagrams show how elements in the system combine to realize complex patterns.
      > Deployment diagrams: show how your system is actually executed and assigned to various pieces of 
        hardware.
      > Package diagrams: special types of class diagrams. They use the same notation as class diagrams
        but their focus is on how classes and interfaces are grouped together.
      > Object diagrams: use the same syntax as class diagrams and show how actual instances of classes
        are related at a specific instance of time. It's a snapshot of the relationships in your system
        at runtime.
    >> Behavioral diagrams focus on the behavior of elements in a system:
      > Activity diagrams
      > Communication diagrams
      > Interaction overview diagrams
      > Sequence diagrams
      > State machine diagrams
      > Timing diagrams
      > Use case diagrams

Chatper 2 Class diagrams
1 Class diagrams capture the static relationships of your software; in other words, how things are put
  together.
2 When writing software you are constantly making design decisions: what classes hold references to o-
  ther classes, which class "owns" some other class, and so on. Class diagrams provide a way to captu-
  re this "physical" structure of a system.
3 You can hide any compartment of the class if that increases the readability of your diagram. When r-
  eading a diagram, you can make no assumptions about a missing compartment; it doesn't mean it is em-
  pty. You may add compartments to a class to show additional information, such as exceptions or events,
  though this is outside of the typical notation.
4 Attributes:
  1) two different notations to show an attribute
    1.1) inlined
    1.2) relationships between classes
  2) notation is available to show such things:
    2.1) multiplicity
    2.2) uniqueness
    2.3) ordering
  3) Inlined attributes:
    3.1) visibility / name : typemultiplicity = default
         visibility ::= {+|-|#|~}
         multiplicity ::= [lower..upper]
  4) Attributes by relationship
    4.1) The relationship notation results in a larger
         class diagram, but it can provide greater detail
         for complex attribute types.
    4.2) The relationship notation also conveys exactly
        how the attribute is contained within a class.
    4.3) To represent an attribute using relationships you
      use one of the association relationships between
      the class containing the attribute and the class
      that represents the attributes.
 5) Relationship notation supports the same syntax as inlined
    notation, though the layout is slightly different.
 6) The attribute's visibility and name are placed near
    the relationship line.
 7) Don't use square brackets for multiplicity, but do
    place the multiplicity specification near the attribute's
    classifier.
 8) Besides multiplicity, you can place constraints on
    attri's    

Chapter 10 Interaction diagrams
1 Interaction diagrams are defined by UML to emphasize the communication betw-
  een objects(not the data manipulation associated with that communication).
2 Interaction diagrams focus on specific messages between objects and how the-
  se messages come together to realize functionality(while composite structure
  show what objects fit together to fulfill a particular requirement, interac-
  tion diagrams show exactly how those objects will realize it).
3 Sequence diagrams are by far the most common way to show the details of an
  interaction.
4 You can introduce local variables to accurately capture the behavior you are
  trying to model.
  Local variables can hold return values, loop information, or just data you
  need for later processing.
  In addition to local variables, sequence diagrams can access data in the 
  participants.
5 Messages
  The focus of interaction diagrams is on the communication between lifelines.
  This communication can take many different forms: method calls, sending a
  signal, creating an instance, destorying an object, etc..
  All of which are collectively called messages.
  A message specifies the kind of communication, its sender, and its receiver.
  1) The most common use of messages is to represent method calls between two
    objects. When messages are used to indicate a method call, you can show t-
    he parameters passed to the method in the message syntax.
4 Interaction participants
  1) You show participants in an interaction using a rectangle called a life-
    line. The term lifeline illustrates UML's bias toward representing inter-
    action diagrams using the sequence diagram notation.
  2) 
5 UML defines two special types of messages: lost messages and found messages:
  1) Lost messages:
    Lost messages are messages that are sent but never reach their destination.
  2) Found messages:
    Found messages are messages are received but the sender is unknown.
  3) Understand that unknown senders and receivers are relative concepts, the
    sender or receiver of a message may be unknown as far as a particular int-
    eraction is concerned, meaning it's really outside the scope of what you
    are trying to show.
6 Occurrences:
  1) Execution occurrences: indicating that an object is involved in execution 
  2) Event occurrences: the smallest building blocks of interaction diagram
  3) Interaction occurrences: is shorthand for copying one interaction into an-
    other.
7 Execution occurrences
  1) The execution occurrence is to show that an object is involved in execut-
    ing some type of action(typically a method call) for a measurable amount of
    time.
  2) It indicate that an object is busy for some period of time.
8 Event Occurrences
  1) Event occurrences are the smallest building blocks of interaction diagra-
    ms; they represent moments in time when something happens.
  2) If object1 sends a message to object2, there are two event occurrences, a
    message send and a message receive. UML carefully defines interaction frag-
    ments as a set of event occurrences where ordering is significant because 
    they represent events over time.
  3) Each type of interaction diagram notation(sequence, communication, etc.) 
    has a way of expressing the time-sensitive nature of the event occurrences.
  4) In a sequence diagram the event occurrences are ordered along the lifelin-
    es and are read from top to bottom.
  5) Parallel 
    step1:
      a
      b
      c
    step2:
      A
      B
      C
    parallel(correct):
      a
      b
      A
      c
      B
      C
    parallel(incorrect, because step2 is not in order):
      a
      b
      B
      c
      A
      C
  6) General ordering
    UML has an explicit notation called a general ordering, you can show a 
    general ordering anywhere in an interaction diagram, but it must connect
    two event occurrences.
  
9 State Invariants
